;; CxOrganism — the biological upper-ontology types: animal/plant and their
;; kinds (mammal, bird, fish, reptile, amphibian, insect, arachnid, tree, flower, …)
;; down to the individual species used across the fables. Sees CxCore;
;; CxUniverse sees it, so any type here is visible from every context.
;;
;; The five vertebrate classes are separated by one `vertebrate_class` metatype rather
;; than by ten `disjoint` sentences. Nothing is stored for the pairs — the clique is
;; consulted — so retracting the metatype releases all ten at once, and retracting one
;; membership releases exactly that class's pairs and leaves the rest separated.

(genlCx CxOrganism CxCore)
(genlCx CxUniverse CxOrganism)

(comment amphibian "A cold-blooded animal that begins life in water and breathes through its skin.")
(genl amphibian animal)
(vertebrate_class amphibian)

(comment animal "A living thing that moves and senses; disjoint from plant.")
(genl animal living_thing)
(set/monotonic (disjoint animal plant))

(comment ant "An industrious insect that stores food for winter.")
(genl ant insect)

(comment arachnid "An eight-legged animal — a spider, a scorpion, a mite. Not an insect, which has six.")
(genl arachnid animal)
(set/monotonic (disjoint arachnid insect))

(comment bee "An insect that gathers nectar and pollinates flowers.")
(genl bee insect)

(comment bird "An animal with feathers. Flight is a capability of the kind, held by default and denied of penguins, rather than a property of each bird.")
(genl bird animal)
(vertebrate_class bird)

(comment cat "A domesticated feline mammal; disjoint from dog.")
(genl cat mammal)

(comment cow "A large domesticated mammal kept for milk and meat.")
(genl cow mammal)

(comment crow "A large black songbird — the flattered bird of the Fox and the Crow.")
(genl crow bird)

(comment dog "A domesticated canine mammal; disjoint from cat.")
(genl dog mammal)
(set/monotonic (disjoint dog cat))

(comment duck "A water bird with webbed feet.")
(genl duck bird)

(comment eagle "A large bird of prey.")
(genl eagle bird)

(comment fish "An animal that lives and breathes in water.")
(genl fish animal)
(vertebrate_class fish)

(comment flower "A flowering plant.")
(genl flower plant)

(comment fox "A wild canine mammal — the flatterer of the Fox and the Crow.")
(genl fox mammal)

(comment frog "A tailless amphibian that jumps and swims.")
(genl frog amphibian)

(comment grass "A low green plant that covers open ground.")
(genl grass plant)

(comment grasshopper "An insect that sings all summer and starves in winter.")
(genl grasshopper insect)

(comment hare "A fast, long-eared mammal — the overconfident racer.")
(genl hare mammal)

(comment horse "A large mammal ridden and used to pull loads.")
(genl horse mammal)

(comment human "A human being — a mammal that is also a social and rational agent.")
(genl human mammal)
(genl human person)

(comment insect "A small six-legged animal.")
(genl insect animal)

(comment lion "A large wild cat — the strong animal of the Lion-and-Mouse fable.")
(genl lion mammal)

(comment mammal "An animal that nurses its young.")
(genl mammal animal)
(vertebrate_class mammal)

(comment mouse "A small rodent — the weak animal that repays the lion's mercy.")
(genl mouse mammal)

(comment oak "A large hardwood tree.")
(genl oak tree)

(comment owl "A nocturnal bird of prey.")
(genl owl bird)

(comment penguin "A flightless bird — the standard exception to 'birds fly'.")
(genl penguin bird)

(comment person "An entity with social agency — a human, or any other agent that stands in social relations. Broader than human: a non-biological agent (a sentient construct) can be a person without being a mammal or an animal, which is what lets the social predicates (friendOf, knows, marriedTo, …) constrain their arguments to person and still admit it. A physical entity — an agent has a location and can act — but not, by itself, a living thing.")
(genl person physical_object)

(comment plant "A living thing that photosynthesizes; disjoint from animal.")
(genl plant living_thing)

(comment rabbit "A small burrowing mammal with long ears.")
(genl rabbit mammal)

(comment reptile "A cold-blooded, scaled animal.")
(genl reptile animal)
(vertebrate_class reptile)

(comment rose "A thorned flowering shrub.")
(genl rose flower)

(comment sheep "A woolly mammal kept in flocks.")
(genl sheep mammal)

(comment snake "A long, limbless reptile.")
(genl snake reptile)

(comment sparrow "A small songbird.")
(genl sparrow bird)

(comment spider "An eight-legged arachnid that spins webs.")
(genl spider arachnid)

(comment tortoise "A slow, shelled reptile — the steady racer who perseveres.")
(genl tortoise reptile)

(comment tree "A tall, woody perennial plant.")
(genl tree plant)

(comment vertebrate_class
         "(vertebrate_class ?type) means that ?type is one of the classes of animal with a backbone. A disjoint_metatype, so its members are pairwise disjoint and nothing has to say so pair by pair: five members separate ten pairs, and the separation is inherited by every subtype — which is what makes a penguin and a dog disjoint without a word being written about either.")
(unary_predicate vertebrate_class)
(genlArg vertebrate_class 1 animal)
(metatype vertebrate_class)
(set/monotonic (disjoint_metatype vertebrate_class))

(comment wolf "A wild canine predator — the danger the boy falsely cries about.")
(genl wolf mammal)
