;; CxSpeechActs — koinii's speech-act vocabulary: the small set of moves agents make,
;; as sentexes in the KB rather than an out-of-band message format (koinii design D5).
;; A move is knowledge: queryable, retractable, and auditable like any
;; other fact.  Two shapes, told apart by whether the move stands on its own or answers
;; another:
;;
;;   - ORIGINATION (asserts, queries) — a plain assertion in the acting agent's own
;;     context.  The claim (or the query node) plus its provenance IS the act; nothing
;;     wraps it, because provenance already records who spoke (first-writer-wins,
;;     storage.md).  `asserts` is therefore documentary vocabulary, never minted — an
;;     assertion in koinii is just an assertion.  `queries` IS minted, as the query
;;     NODE a responder later names by handle, because a question must be told apart
;;     from a claim.
;;   - RESPONSE (answers, disputes, endorses, justifies, votesFor, votesAgainst) — a
;;     META-SENTEX on the sentex
;;     it responds to, naming the target by handle `(sentexHandle H)`.  Each carries
;;     `target_following_predicate`, so retracting the target sweeps its replies with it
;;     (core/retract-following-metas!) — the cascade a message bus cannot give (D1,
;;     Resolution).  Two independent facts force this shape: the cascade needs BOTH a
;;     meta-sentex AND the mark (an unmarked meta merely orphans), and first-writer-wins
;;     forces each act to be its own object with its own creator.
;;
;; Error acts (notUnderstood, refuse) reference the received edge they could not parse
;; or will not act on, in the refusing agent's context — deliberately UNMARKED, so a
;; parse failure outlives what provoked it.  `retracts` is the engine's retract! on a
;; handle.  Adjudication is NOT here: this layer only represents the moves, and the
;; policies that resolve a dispute are vaelii.koinii.adjudication's.  The action
;; dimension (request / propose / accept) maps onto A2A, not this vocabulary (D5).
;;
;; Sees CxCore for its vocabulary.  Actor ids are the individuals registered in
;; CxRegistry; the arg to `agent` documents that, and is inert here
;; (open-world) until a context that also sees the registry activates it.

(genlCx CxSpeechActs CxCore)      ; CxSpeechActs speaks CxCore's vocabulary

;; ---- origination: the claim (or query node) plus provenance IS the act ----

(comment asserts
         "(asserts ?agent ?proposition) names the move of ?agent putting ?proposition forward as true. DOCUMENTARY vocabulary, deliberately never minted as a sentex: origination is the plain assertion of ?proposition in ?agent's own context, and its provenance already records ?agent as creator (first-writer-wins). Wrapping the claim would duplicate what provenance holds, so an assertion in koinii is just an assertion — see speech_acts/assert-claim.")
(binary_predicate asserts)
(instance_relation_predicate asserts)
(arg asserts 1 agent)

(comment queries
         "(queries ?agent ?question) is the query NODE ?agent asserts in its own context — the thing a responder answers by handle. Minted (unlike asserts) because a question must be distinguishable from a claim: ?agent is not asserting ?question true, it is asking. ?question is a ground term naming what is asked, left untyped since it carries no fixed type. See speech_acts/pose-query.")
(binary_predicate queries)
(instance_relation_predicate queries)
(arg queries 1 agent)

;; ---- response acts: meta-sentexes on their target, target_following_predicate ----

(comment answers
         "(answers ?agent ?content (sentexHandle ?target)) is ?agent's answer ?content to the query sentex ?target, a META-SENTEX naming ?target by handle. Declared target_following_predicate: retract ?target and this answer is torn down with it. The answerer's identity comes from THIS sentex's context and provenance, not from the query it answers. ?content is the answer term, left untyped; the handle arg is left untyped since the target can be any sentex. Carries no relation_kind mark: instance_relation_predicate classifies a two-place claim between individuals (CxCore), and this is three-place over an agent, a term and a handle.")
(ternary_predicate answers)
(arg answers 1 agent)
(target_following_predicate answers)

(comment disputes
         "(disputes ?agent (sentexHandle ?target)) records that ?agent challenges the claim ?target, a META-SENTEX naming it by handle. Declared target_following_predicate, so it does not outlive its target. The disputing agent also asserts the rebutting claim (the negation of ?target) in its own context, so the pair surfaces in (contradictions kb) with both sides' :context / :defeat-class / :kind, which is what the per-channel dispute reads scope and the adjudication policies resolve. This layer represents the challenge; it does not adjudicate it. See speech_acts/dispute.")
(binary_predicate disputes)
(instance_relation_predicate disputes)
(arg disputes 1 agent)
(target_following_predicate disputes)

(comment endorses
         "(endorses ?agent (sentexHandle ?target)) records that ?agent stands behind the claim ?target, a META-SENTEX naming it by handle. Declared target_following_predicate. Because provenance is first-writer-wins, an endorsement CANNOT be ?agent re-asserting ?target (that writes no new provenance) — it must be its own sentex with its own creator, which is why two endorsers of one claim are two distinct endorses sentexes. The mark sweeps on RETRACTION only: an endorsement of a claim that is stored but no longer believed is left standing, and a reader who wants only the endorsements of believed claims filters on belief.")
(binary_predicate endorses)
(instance_relation_predicate endorses)
(arg endorses 1 agent)
(target_following_predicate endorses)

(comment justifies
         "(justifies ?agent ?ground (sentexHandle ?target)) records that ?agent offers ?ground as a reason for the claim ?target, a META-SENTEX naming ?target by handle. Declared target_following_predicate. ?ground is the reason (a term or another sentex handle), left untyped. Represents the move only: nothing weighs a justification, and no rule reads one. Carries no relation_kind mark, for answers' reason.")
(ternary_predicate justifies)
(arg justifies 1 agent)
(target_following_predicate justifies)

;; ---- ballots: a response act a policy COUNTS rather than merely records ----

(comment votesFor
         "(votesFor ?agent (sentexHandle ?target)) records that ?agent casts a ballot FOR the claim ?target — a META-SENTEX naming it by handle, in ?agent's own context. Declared target_following_predicate, like every other response act: a ballot is cast ON a claim, so retracting the disputed claim withdraws the votes with it rather than leaving a count standing over nothing. Unlike endorses, a ballot is COUNTED: the majority policy tallies distinct voters on each side and upholds the side with strictly more, leaving a tie open. One ballot per agent per stance, by sentence identity — changing a vote retracts the old ballot first. See channel/vote.")
(binary_predicate votesFor)
(instance_relation_predicate votesFor)
(arg votesFor 1 agent)
(target_following_predicate votesFor)

(comment votesAgainst
         "(votesAgainst ?agent (sentexHandle ?target)) records that ?agent casts a ballot AGAINST the claim ?target. Same shape, placement and mark as votesFor — a META-SENTEX on the target, target_following_predicate, one ballot per agent per stance. A voter holding both stances at once has SPOILED their ballot: the tally counts them on neither side, so one self-contradicting voter can neither manufacture a tie nor swing a majority.")
(binary_predicate votesAgainst)
(instance_relation_predicate votesAgainst)
(arg votesAgainst 1 agent)
(target_following_predicate votesAgainst)

;; ---- retraction: the engine operation, named for completeness ----

(comment retracts
         "(retracts ?agent ?target) names the move of ?agent withdrawing the claim ?target. DOCUMENTARY vocabulary: it is realized as the engine's retract! on the target handle (speech_acts/retract-move), not asserted as a sentex — retracting a claim is a real teardown, and it is exactly this teardown that the target_following_predicate response acts cascade with.")
(binary_predicate retracts)
(instance_relation_predicate retracts)
(arg retracts 1 agent)

;; ---- error acts: reference the received edge, in the refuser's context, UNMARKED ----

(comment notUnderstood
         "(notUnderstood ?agent (sentexHandle ?received)) records that ?agent could not parse the received edge ?received — the error act an at-least-once, decoupled path needs (D5). A META-SENTEX naming ?received by handle, in ?agent's own context. Deliberately NOT target_following_predicate: a parse failure is a fact about the exchange that should outlive whatever provoked it. It records the failure and nothing more — no rule reads it, and it commits ?agent to nothing. Spelled camelCase because a KB predicate admits no hyphen.")
(binary_predicate notUnderstood)
(instance_relation_predicate notUnderstood)
(arg notUnderstood 1 agent)

(comment refuse
         "(refuse ?agent (sentexHandle ?received)) records that ?agent will not act on the received edge ?received. Same shape and placement as notUnderstood, and also UNMARKED, for the same reason. It records the refusal and nothing more; no rule reads it.")
(binary_predicate refuse)
(instance_relation_predicate refuse)
(arg refuse 1 agent)

;; ---- the one rule that earns its place: disputed claims are queryable ----
;; A disputes edge marks its target as contested, so 'which claims are under dispute'
;; is a plain read rather than a meta-sentex walk.  It only REPRESENTS (it does not
;; adjudicate).  Belief-following by construction: the conclusion is JTMS-supported by
;; the disputes edge, so retracting the target (which cascades the edge) removes
;; `contested` too, with no mark of its own.
;;
;; Nothing in the engine or in the koinii modules reads `contested` — the dispute reads
;; go to the engine's contradiction surface instead, which sees derived clashes too.  It
;; is here as a vocabulary hook for a reader querying the KB directly.

(comment contested
         "(contested (sentexHandle ?target)) means the sentex ?target is under dispute — derived from a disputes edge, never asserted directly. Lets a reader query the disputed claims without walking the disputes meta-sentexes. The handle arg is left untyped.")
(unary_predicate contested)

(implies (disputes ?agent ?target) (contested ?target))
