;; CxUniverse — the collector of the upper spindle.  Sees every upper member
;; (CxAbstract, CxOrganism, CxSociety, CxLife, CxMeasure, CxReflection, CxSpace, CxTime),
;; so cross-member disjointness assertions that require both sides visible
;; live here rather than in CxCore (which cannot see the members) or in one
;; member (which cannot see the other).  A claim whose terms one member sees belongs
;; to that member.

;; --- cross-member disjointness (upper spindle) ---
;; organization and animal are separated by (partition thing tangible intangible) in
;; CxCore: organization is intangible and animal is tangible.
;; A bonsai or a grafted apple tree is a made plant, and a rock is natural and no plant.
;; The fact derives plant's orthogonals with made and with natural (origin_type is
;; CxAbstract's, plant CxOrganism's).
(typeOrthogonal origin_type plant)
;; Mammals and birds are warm-blooded, so a warm-blooded animal is a vertebrate by default
;; (warm_blooded is CxLife's, vertebrate CxOrganism's).
(genl warm_blooded vertebrate)
;; A cloned sheep is a made vertebrate, and a lab-bred fruit fly a made invertebrate (made is
;; CxAbstract's, vertebrate and invertebrate CxOrganism's).
(orthogonal made vertebrate)
(orthogonal made invertebrate)
;; A water level or a tap's rate is a quantity, and a quantity causes nothing; what changes
;; it does (quantity is CxMeasure's, acausal CxAbstract's).
(genl quantity acausal)

;; --- the shipped contexts ---
;; Every genlCx edge is stored here, and (arg genlCx 1 context) and (arg genlCx 2 context)
;; type both of its arguments, so the memberships are stated here as well.
(context CxAbstract)
(context CxAnatomy)
(context CxBiology)
(context CxChange)
(context CxComputing)
(context CxCore)
(context CxKinship)
(context CxLife)
(context CxMeasure)
(context CxMereology)
(context CxNormalPhysicalConditions)
(context CxOrganism)
(context CxPerception)
(context CxReflection)
(context CxSize)
(context CxSocial)
(context CxSocialExtension)
(context CxSociety)
(context CxSpace)
(context CxTime)
(context CxUniverse)
(context CxWell)

;; --- cross-member related clusters (upper spindle) ---
;; time_interval is CxAbstract's; Duration, the dimension a stretch of time is
;; measured in, is CxMeasure's.
(termsRelated time_interval Duration)

;; --- travelling / flying: event kinds an ability names ------------------------
;; CxLife's hasCapability and capabilityType take an event kind as their second argument:
;; (hasCapability Tweety flying) says Tweety can be the doer of a flying event.  The event
;; kinds are stated in the collector: they relate CxLife's abilities to CxAbstract's causal_event,
;; and only the collector sees both.
(comment travelling "A causal event of getting from one place to another under the doer's own power. flying is a kind of travelling; another way of travelling is stated as its own event kind below travelling.")
(genl travelling causal_event)

(comment flying "A travelling event through the air under the doer's own power. A kind of travelling, so whatever can fly can travel without that being stated twice.")
(genl flying travelling)
